# GA 129. Wonders of the World, Ordeals of the Soul, Revelations of the Spirit (1963) - Rudolf Steiner Archive

# Donate books to help fund our work. Learn more→The Rudolf Steiner Archive

a project of Steiner Online Library, a public charity

Books

Articles

Lectures

GA

Date

Shop

Funding

DONATE

## Wonders of the World, Ordeals of the Soul, Revelations of the Spirit 
GA 129

 Steiner depicts here the deep realities of the spiritual life of the Greeks and the deeds of their gods, as well as the Eleusinian and Dionysian Mysteries. He shows how the same living reality of the spiritual world can be reawakened today in a modern form through spiritual science due to the incarnation of Christ at the time of the Greek culture. 
  The translation of these lectures has been made from shorthand reports unrevised by the lecturer and published under the title: Weltenwunder, Seelenprüfungen und Geistesoffenbarungen (VoIume No. 129 in the Complete Centenary Edition of the works of Rudolf Steiner in the original German). 
  This First English edition is published in agreement with the Rudolf Steiner Nachlassverwaltung, Dornach, Switzerland. Translated by Dorothy Lenn, with assistance from Owen Barfield.

Lecture I**August 18, 1911**Lecture II**August 19, 1911**Lecture III**August 20, 1911**Lecture IV**August 21, 1911**Lecture V**August 22, 1911**Lecture VI**August 23, 1911**Lecture VII**August 24, 1911**Lecture VIII**August 25, 1911**Lecture IX**August 26, 1911**Lecture X**August 27, 1911**Pay what you can to use this service. $12 USD per month is requested but more helps to ensure our sustainability.

SUBSCRIBEOther Ways to Give →

### Overview

IntroductionBiographiesTimelinePostsNewsletterAbout UsUse Guidelines

### Search

DateVolume/GATopicsPracticeOther AuthorsResources

Print/PDF

Northern Hemisphere

Week 38

 I feel, as though its spell were lifted, 
  The spirit child in womb of soul; 
  Within the heart’s still radiance 
  The holy World Word has begotten 
  The heavenly fruit of hope, 
  Which joyfully grows toward worlds afar 
  From out my being’s ground in God.   —Tr. John F. Gardner 

Southern Hemisphere

Week 12

 The radiant beauty of the world 
  Impels me now from depths of soul 
  To free my own life-powers divine 
  For World-aspiring flight; 
  To leave my self behind 
  And simply trusting, seek my Self 
  In cosmic light and cosmic warmth.   —Tr. John F. Gardner 

more  Bookstore Highlights

### Search

Books

Articles

Lectures

Volume/GA

Dates

Topics

### Quick Links

About Us

Use Guidelines

Funding

Posts

Practice

Resources

Shop

### Newsletter

 Thank you for Signing Up   1,true,6,Contact Email,2   1,false,1,First Name,2   1,false,1,Last Name,2  

© 2021-2025 Steiner Online Library dba Rudolf Steiner Archive, a nonprofit service for anthroposophical research and education. Not affiliated with the Anthroposophical Society or the Rudolf Steiner Archiv in Dornach.

This material is made available through the Rudolf Steiner Archive, [rsarchive.org](https://rsarchive.org), an project of the community-funded nonprofit, Steiner Online Library. Please consider making a tax deductible [donation](https://rsarchive.org/Helping/) to support our work. This service is not affiliated with the Anthroposophical Society or the Rudolf Steiner Archiv in Dornach.

[Terms of Service](https://rsarchive.org/Helping/) | [Privacy Policy](https://rsarchive.org/Legal/PrivacyPolicy.html)